---
title: Setattr Season 1
date: "2014-12-08T08:59:00-06:00"

---

Let's cut to the chase: today, [setattr season 1: developer tools][preorder] is
available for preorder on Gumroad, with release January 6, 2015. It's going to
cover:

[preorder]: https://gum.co/setattr-season-1/

<!--more-->

 - IPython
 - Cookiecutter
 - Setuptools
 - Sphinx
 - and a mystery bonus lesson! (just kidding, it's pep8 and pylint)

So what's a setattr season, you may ask? It's a collection of videos and
exercises that get you to learn and keep knowledge stuck in your head so you
have it when you need it. Python libraries and tools tend to be in little
clusters: if you know one, knowing the others is very helpful since they tend to
play off each other's strengths and patch over weaknesses. As a big example
consider Django and that ecosystem, but also `sqlalchemy` and `sqlalchemy-utils`
and related libraries. The point of releasing the videos all together is that it
lets us go through the whole of one of those little constellations at a time.

If you've been following along at home, you know I've been making lessons and
blog posts and sending emails for this thing for a couple months now. To be
honest, most of that time was spent on making a subscription site. But then Amy
Hoy and Alex Hillman of internet fame released [Just Fucking Ship][jfs], and I
bought it, read, it, and did a giant facepalm. I was focusing all my effort on
something that wasn't getting the product any closer to shipping. So I dropped
that (for now) and now I'm going to distribute through Gumroad, where I can just
upload a file with content and have it distributed automatically to everyone who
bought it. No mess, no fuss, and no implementing payment provider integration
myself. And it's going out [January 6!][preorder]

[jfs]: http://unicornfree.com/just-fucking-ship
[setattr]: https://www.setattr.com/
